
Return to List

1 of 1 DOCUMENT


The Express

December 17, 2011 Saturday  
Edition 1; 
National Edition

Save cash by switching to healthy food

Date:  17/12/2011
Title:  7
Word Count:  345
Sentence Count:  16

BYLINE: Jo Willey

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 348 words

HAVING a healthy diet can cost people less than eating junk food, according to new research.
It says parents of obese children can save up to £6.58 a week by changing shopping habits. 
The study challenges the main reasons many families give for eating the wrong food - that healthier options cost more.
A research team led by University of Bristol doctors Julian Hamilton-Shield and Debbie Sharp, analysed food diaries kept by the families of obese children.
They measured the cost of substituting healthy for unhealthy food and found it can cost less.
Figures revealed healthier eating can cost up to £2.31 extra a week but savings of £6.58 a week can be made by switching shops.
Reduced They clearly show it is possible to switch to a healthy diet and still reduce costs, says the research published in the Obesity issue of the British Journal of General Practice.
Professor Julian Hamilton-Shield, of Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, who is an expert in child diabetes, obesity and metabolism, said: "Food cost is frequently cited as a reason for failure to address eating behaviours in clinical practice.
"This study demonstrates that for many this is a perceived rather than a real barrier."
The food diaries of obese children were analysed for various aspects of nutritional content then converted by qualified dieticians into "healthier option" daily menus.
The diaries showed that on average they consumed 221 calories per day more than the estimated average requirements. 
The adjusted healthier menus reduced this to just seven calories above.
Researchers compared the cost of the two menus if bought from budget supermarkets, mid-range supermarkets and local shops.
They concluded that shoppers at a mid-range supermarket eating a diet of low nutritional quality could switch to a healthy diet by shopping at a budget supermarket and still save money. 
Other factors play a part in diet, such as taste preferences and the time people are able to spend cooking.
But the results suggest that as pressure grows on family finances, there are healthy eating options that will not break the bank.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Popular but the cheaper option isn't a burger, the study found

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

JOURNAL-CODE: DXP


Copyright 2011 Express Newspapers
All Rights Reserved


