BBC
Warning over children's multi-screen viewing
By Katherine Sellgren BBC News education reporter
Parents are being warned of a trend among children of watching television while using other interactive devices. 
Researchers found children were often "multi-screen viewing" - watching TV while simultaneously using smartphones, laptops or hand-held gaming devices.
Academics at Loughborough and Bristol universities say such habits are linked to obesity, poorer mental well-being and health problems in later life. 
The researchers say families need help to limit multi-screen viewing.
The study - I'm on it 24/7 at the moment - questioned 63 10-to-11-year-olds.
The researchers found the children often used a second device to fill in breaks during their entertainment - for example, texting or talking to their friends during advertisements or while they were waiting for computer games to load. 
They also found television was used to provide background entertainment while they were doing something else - especially if the programme chosen by their family was considered boring. 
One of the study's respondents said: "I'm on my DSi and my laptop. 
On my DSi I'm on MSN and on my laptop I'm on Facebook and then the TV is on." 
Technological advances 
Dr Russ Jago, from Bristol University's Centre for Exercise, Nutrition and Health Sciences, said: "There is a shortage of information about the nature of contemporary screen viewing amongst children, especially given the rapid advances in screen-viewing equipment technology and their widespread availability.
"For example, TV programmes are watched on computers, games consoles can be used to surf the internet, smartphones, tablet computers and hand-held games play music, video games provide internet access, and laptop computers can do all of the above."
Dr Jago said health campaigns recommended reducing the amount of time children spend watching TV. 
"However, the children in this study often had access to at least five different devices at any one time, and many of these devices were portable. 
"This meant that children were able to move the equipment between their bedrooms and family rooms, depending on whether they wanted privacy or company. 
"This suggests that we need to work with families to develop strategies to limit the overall time spent multi-screen viewing wherever it occurs within the home."


DAILY MAIL (London)
 Date Published: August 3, 2011 Wednesday
Title: 2
Body: 371
Sentences: 15
 MULTI-SCREEN GENERATION  Daily Mail Reporter
IF you're an adult in this hi-tech age, you might struggle with the multi-tasking nature of receiving a text while watching the TV.
But there's a generation growing up which is totally at ease with juggling four interactive devices at the same time.
Researchers say ten and 11-year-olds are often 'multi-screen viewing' Ð watching the TV while simultaneously using iPads, smartphones, laptops and hand-held gaming computers.
While that might seem quite skilful, they warn that such sedentary behaviour is believed to increase the risk of obesity and mental health problems in youngsters. 
It is now possible to watch TV 'on demand' via the internet, play computer games on laptops, hand-held devices or mobile phones, keep in contact with friends using text, Facebook, Skype, and MSN, and to do all this concurrently.
The study questioned 63 ten and 11-year-olds and found the children enjoyed looking at more than one screen at a time.
They use a second device to fill in breaks during their entertainment, often talking or texting friends during adverts or while they were waiting for computer games to load.
The television was also used to provide background entertainment while they were doing something else Ð especially if the programme chosen by their family was considered 'boring'.
One of the study's respondents said: 'I'm on my DSi and my laptop. On my DSi I'm on MSN and on my laptop I'm on Facebook and then the TV is on.'
Dr Russ Jago, from Bristol University, said: 'TV programmes are watched on computers, games consoles can be used to surf the internet, smartphones, tablet computers and hand-held games play music, video games provide internet access, and laptop computers can do all of the above.
'Health campaigns recommend reducing the amount of time children spend watching TV.
However, the children in this study often had access to at least five different devices at any one time, and many of these devices were portable.
'This meant children were able to move the equipment between their bedrooms and family rooms, depending on whether they wanted privacy or company.
'This suggests that we need to work with families to develop strategies to limit the overall time spent multi-screen viewing wherever it occurs within the home.'

The Daily Telegraph (London)

Date Published: August 3, 2011 Wednesday  Title: 10
Body: 189
Sentences: 8
 The 'bored' children who use five screens at a time  BYLINE: Stephen Adams  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8  LENGTH: 201 words
CHILDREN use up to five screens at a time including mobile phones, laptop computers, games consoles and televisions because they are bored with focusing on just one, new research claims.
Children text friends during advertising breaks, use instant messaging or Facebook when their parents are watching television, or play electronic games while waiting for their laptop to load.
Researchers at Bristol and Loughborough universities, who studied 63 children aged 10 and 11, say campaigns to reduce "screen time" will only work if people understand how children use technology, and why.
Russell Jago, from Bristol University's Centre for Exercise, Nutrition and Health, said many of the devices used were portable.
"This meant that children were able to move the equipment between their bedrooms and family rooms, depending on whether they wanted privacy or company," he said.
"So simply removing the television from a child's room may not be enough to address the health concerns and we need to work with families to develop strategies to limit the overall time spent multi-screen viewing wherever it occurs."
The study is published today in the International Journal of Behavioural Nutrition and Physical Activity.

The Express
 Date Published: August 3, 2011 Wednesday  Title: 5
Body: 250
Sentences: 11

Multi-screen viewing 'harmful to children'  BYLINE: By Geoff Maynard  SECTION: NEWS; 22  LENGTH: 249 words
PARENTS have been warned that letting their children watch TV while they use other interactive devices could harm their health.
Researchers said youngsters often "multi-screen view" - looking at the TV while using a smartphone, laptop or hand-held gaming device.
This leads to a sedentary lifestyle, which can increase the risk of obesity and mental health problems, say experts at Bristol and Loughborough universities.
It is now possible to watch TV on demand via the internet, play computer games on laptops, handheld devices or mobile phones, keep in contact with friends using text, Facebook, Skype and MSN - or do all this together.
Sixty 10 to 11-year-olds questioned said they enjoyed looking at more than one screen at a time.
They used a second device to fill in breaks, often talking to or texting their friends during adverts or while they were waiting for computer games to load.
The television was also used to provide background entertainment while they were doing something else, especially if the programme chosen by their family was considered boring.
One of the children said: "I'm on my DSi and my laptop. On my DSi I'm on MSN and on my laptop I'm on Facebook and the TV is on."
Dr Russ Jago, from Bristol University's centre for exercise, nutrition and health sciences, said: "Health campaigns recommend reducing the amount of time children spend watching TV.
"We need to work with families to develop strategies to limit the overall time spent multi-screen viewing within the home."




GUARDIAN
Study warns parents about rise of children multi-screening
	•	Staff and agencies 
	•	The Guardian, Wednesday 3 August 2011
Sedentary lifestyle – linked to spending lots of time watching TV and playing computer games – thought to increase obesity risk
Parents should be aware of the rise of "multiple screen" viewing among children on devices including televisions, smartphones and portable games consoles, when monitoring whether they are being active enough, researchers say.
A sedentary lifestyle – linked to spending lots of time watching TV and playing computer games – is thought to increase the risk of obesity and mental health problems, researchers at Bristol and Loughborough universities said in a study published on Wednesday.
They questioned 63 10- and 11-year-olds and found that children enjoyed looking at more than one screen at a time.
Russ Jago, of Bristol University's centre for exercise, nutrition and health sciences, said: "Health campaigns recommend reducing the amount of time children spend watching TV.
"However, the children in this study often had access to at least five different devices at any one time, and many of these devices were portable."
In the study the children would move the equipment between their bedrooms and family rooms, depending on whether they wanted privacy or company, said Jago.
 "This suggests that we need to work with families to develop strategies to limit the overall time spent multiscreen viewing wherever it occurs within the home."
The children would use a second device to fill in breaks during their entertainment, often talking or texting their friends during adverts or while waiting for computer games to load. 
The television was also used to provide background entertainment while they were doing something else – especially if the programme chosen by their family was considered "boring".
One respondent said: "I'm on my DSi [handheld games console] and my laptop. On my DSi I'm on MSN and on my laptop I'm on Facebook and then the TV is on."
There has needs to be more research into multi-screen viewing.
Jago said: "There is a shortage of information about the nature of contemporary screen viewing amongst children, especially given the rapid advances in screen viewing equipment technology and their widespread availability.
"For example, TV programmes are watched on computers, games consoles can be used to surf the internet, smartphones, tablet computers and hand-held games play music, video games provide internet access, and laptop computers can do all of the above."
The research paper, entitled I'm on it 24/7 at the moment: A qualitative examination of multiscreen viewing behaviours among UK 10-11 year olds is published in the International Journal of Behavioural Nutrition and Physical Activity.


The Mirror
 Date Published: August 3, 2011 Wednesday  Title: 3
Body: 137
Sentences: 8

 MULTI-TECH KIDS’ RISK  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20  LENGTH: 135 words
CHILDREN are putting their health in danger through “multi-screen viewing”, parents have been warned.
Youngsters often watch TV while at the same time using smartphones, laptops or hand-held gaming devices, a study of 10 and 11-year-olds found.
It is claimed such a sedentary lifestyle can increase the risk of obesity and mental health problems.
A child said in the study: “On my DSi I’m on MSN and on my laptop I’m on Facebook and then the TV is on.”
Dr Russ Jago, of Bristol University, said: “Health campaigns recommend children watch less TV. 
But in this study they often had access to at least five different devices at any one time, many portable. We need to work with families to limit multi-screen viewing.”
The research is in the International Journal of Behavioural Nutrition and Physical Activity today.


