  The Daily Telegraph (London)
 July 13, 2011 Wednesday  Edition 1;  National Edition
 A smile may unlock the autism genes;  In Brief  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13  LENGTH: 84 words
A smile or a frown could hold the key to identifying families with a higher risk of autism.
People with autism often struggle to read other people's emotions and facial expressions.
Researchers at Cambridge University have found that siblings of those with autism show similar brain patterns when viewing facial expressions.
The findings reported today in the journal Translational Psychiatry could help scientists identify a ''biomarker'' to identify genes linked to an increased familial risk of autism.


 The Mirror
 July 13, 2011 Wednesday  3 Star Edition
 SMILE HOLDS AUTISM CLUE;  HEALTH  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28  LENGTH: 83 words
REActioN to a smile or a frown could hold the key to identifying families with a higher risk of autism.
People with the condition often struggle to process different facial expressions.
Now scientists have found that their brothers and sisters also have a lower brain reaction to emotions.
Autistic children are 20 times more likely to have an autistic sibling, the cambridge University study found.
Researchers now hope to identify a genetic "biomarker" to pinpoint the genes which cause the condition.

  The Sun (England)
 July 13, 2011 Wednesday  Edition 1;  Scotland
 Bruv link to autism  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29  LENGTH: 70 words
THE brothers and sisters of autistic people have a "marker" in their brain which indicates a dormant version of the condition, research shows.
Siblings may appear outwardly unaffected but can display similar brain activity because of a genetic trait.
One way this shows itself is as a lack of response to others' facial expressions.
It is hoped the study at Cambridge University may help in finding ways of treating autism.

 Metro (UK)
 July 13, 2011 Wednesday  Edition 1;  Ireland
 Response to a smile or a frown 'key to autism risk'  BYLINE: Ben Kendall  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8  LENGTH: 274 words
A SMILE or a frown could hold the key to helping identify families with a higher risk of autism.
People with autism often struggle to read other people's emotions and their brains process facial expressions differently to those without autism.
Now researchers at the University of Cambridge have found that siblings of those with autism show similar brain patterns when viewing facial expressions.
The findings could help scientists identify a 'biomarker', used to identify genes linked to an increased familial risk of autism.
Dr Michael Spencer, who led the study, said: 'The findings provide a springboard to investigate what specific genes are associated with this biomarker.
'The brain's response to facial emotion could be a fundamental building block in causing autism and its associated difficulties.'
The study, published in the journal Translational Psychiatry, compared 40 families that had both a teenager with autism and a sibling without, with 40 teenagers with no family history of autism.
By comparing the brain's activity when viewing a happy versus a neutral face, the scientists were able to observe the areas within the brain that respond to this emotion.
Although siblings of those with autism did not have autism or Asperger syndrome, they had decreased activity in some areas of the brain.
Explaining why only one of the siblings might develop autism when both have the same biomarker, Dr Spencer said: 'It is likely that in the sibling who develops autism, additional as yet unknown steps - such as further genetic, brain structure or function differences - take place to cause autism.'
Siblings show similiar patterns in the brain

