DAILY MAIL (London)
 November 17, 2011 Thursday
 SUFFERING FROM THAT 3PM SLUMP? TRY AN EGG  BYLINE: By Fiona MacRae Science Correspondent  LENGTH: 244 words
IF you start to nod off at your desk in mid-afternoon, don't reach for a sweet treat as a pick-me-up Ð have an egg.
Scientists have found that egg proteins, specifically those found in the white, help us stay awake and feel alert.
They are much more effective than carbohydrates found in the chocolates, biscuits and sweets often relied on for a quick energy boost.
Cambridge University researchers looked at how nutrients affect the brain cells that keeping us awake and burning calories.
A mixture similar to the protein content of egg whites activated these cells, triggering the release of the stimulant orexin.
Sugar, however, blocked the release of orexin.
Researcher Dr Denis Burdakov said: 'What is exciting is to have a rational way to "tune" select brain cells to be more or less active by deciding what food to eat.
'Research suggests that if you have a choice between jam on toast, or egg whites on toast, go for the latter.Ê
'Even though the two may contain the same number of calories, having a bit of protein will tell the body to burn more calories out of those consumed.'
The findings were published in the journal Neuron.
The slogan 'Go to work on an egg' was used in a 1960s advertising campaign by the Egg Marketing Board.
More recently researchers for the British Nutrition Foundation, part-funded by the poultry industry, concluded that the type of cholesterol found in eggs has minimal effect on raising the risk of heart disease.

The Mirror
 November 18, 2011 Friday  Eire Edition
 EGG 'KEEPS YOU ALERT';  NUTRITION  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16  LENGTH: 76 words
GOING to work on an egg - as people were urged to do in the 1960s - may be sound scientific advice, research has shown.
Having egg on toast will keep you more awake than jam on toast.
Scientists found egg proteins help us stay alert and keep the body slim by making it easier to burn calories.
Lead researcher Dr Denis Burdakov said: "What is exciting is to have a rational way to 'tune' select brain cells to be more or less active by deciding what food to eat."

 The Sun (England)
 November 17, 2011 Thursday  Edition 1;  Scotland
 FEELING TIRED? GET AN EGG BUZZ  SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 56,57  LENGTH: 186 words
EGGS are better than chocolate for an energy boost, say experts.
Scientists at the University of Cambridge believe it is protein and not sugar that activates the cells responsible for keeping us awake and burning calories.
They compared the effects of different foods on the body's orexin cells and found that amino acids - nutrients in proteins such as egg whites - are the most effective stimulant.
Lead researcher Dr Denis Burdakov, said: "Electrical impulses emitted by orexin cells stimulate wakefulness and tell the body to burn calories.
"We wondered whether dietary nutrients altered those impulses.
"Glucose actually blocks orexin cells, which may be why we sometimes feel sleepy after eating."
The findings may shed light on why protein meals can make people feel more alert than carbohydrate meals.
Dr Burdakov said: "To combat obesity and insomnia, we need more information on how diet affects both.
"Research suggests if you have a choice between jam on toast or egg whites on toast, go for the latter.
"Though they may contain the same number of calories having protein will tell the body to burn more calories."

