DAILY MAIL
Women with high IQs 'more likely to take illegal drugs in their thirties'
	•	They are more open to new experiences
	•	Intelligent women 'don't believe they are at risk trying drugs once or twice'
By Daily Mail Reporter UPDATED: 00:07, 15 November 2011 


Women with high IQs are far more likely to take cannabis, cocaine and ecstasy in their thirties, a study has found.
Researchers think they are more open to new experiences so are more willing to experiment with illegal substances.
The study by Dr James White from Cardiff University found that women with higher than average IQ scores were twice as likely to have taken drugs such as cannabis, cocaine, ecstasy and amphetamines in their thirties than those with lower scores.

Dr White looked at the records of 8,000 people dating back to the 1970s who had  all had their IQ measured at the ages of five and ten.
They had also answered questions about whether they had taken any drugs when they were 16 and again when they were 30.
 The study, published in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, found that women aged 30 who had higher than average IQs – between 107 and 150 -  were more than twice as likely to have used illegal substances compared to  those with scores of less than 95.
An average IQ score is 100.

Men with high IQ scores were 50 per cent more likely to have used amphetamines, ecstasy, and several illicit drugs than those with low scores – so the link was  not as strong as amongst women.
Dr White said: 'If we were to speculate it could be that people with high IQs  tend to be more open to new experiences.
'They also don’t think they are at risk by just trying once or twice.'
  Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2061503/Women-high-IQs-likely-illegal-drugs-thirties.html#ixzz2E5liCSfJ  Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook



2 of 2 DOCUMENTS



telegraph.co.uk

November 15, 2011 Tuesday 11:42 AM GMT 

Clever children more likely to end up on drugs; 
Intelligent girls and boys are much more likely than average to take illegal drugs like cocaine, cannabis and ecstasy when they grow up, a study has found.

Date:  15/11/2011
Title:  36
Word Count:  413
Sentence Count:  15

BYLINE: By Stephen Adams Medical Correspondent

LENGTH: 403 words

Scientists think they do so in part as a "coping strategy" to avoid bullying from their peers, and partially because they find life boring. 
The effect is more pronounced in girls than boys, with those exhibiting high IQs as children more than twice as likely to have tried cocaine or cannabis by the age of 30, as those of lower intelligence.  
The effect in boys with high IQs is also marked, with them being around 50 per cent more likely to have done so by that age as their less intelligent former classmates. 
A team at Cardiff University analysed data from almost 8,000 people born in one week in April 1970, who were enrolled at birth in the ongoing British Cohort Study, which follows participants through life. 
All these children had their IQs tested between the age of five and 10. 
Drug use, as reported by the participants themselves, was then recorded at 16 and 30 years of age. 
At 16, 7.0 per cent of boys and 6.3 per cent of girls had used cannabis. 
This minority had "statistically significant higher mean childhood IQ scores" than non-users, according to the authors of the report, published in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health.
At 30, 35.4 per cent of men and 15.9 per cent of women had used cannabis, while the figures for cocaine were 8.6 and 3.6 per cent respectively. 
The authors noted: "Across most drugs (except amphetamine in men), men and women who reported using in the past 12 months had a significantly higher childhood IQ score than those who reported no use."
They concluded: "High childhood IQ may increase the risk of substance abuse in early adulthood."
The study did not look into why this was the case, although it did not fine any relationship between the social class of the participants' parents and future drug use. 
However, the authors noted that other studies suggested "intellectually 'gifted children' [with an IQ higher than 130] report high levels of boredom and being stigmatised by peers, either of which could conceivably increase vulnerability to using drugs as an avoidant coping strategy". 
Dr James White of Cardiff University's Centre for Development and Evaluation of Complex Interventions for Public Health Understanding, said: "Although it is not yet clear exactly why there should be a link between high IQ and illicit drug use, previous research has shown that people with a high IQ are more open to new experiences and keen on novelty and stimulation." 

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Publication

JOURNAL-CODE: WEBDTNS


Copyright 2011 Telegraph Media Group Limited
All Rights Reserved


