Date Published: 26/09/2011
Title: 8
Body: 534
Sentences: 25

DAILY MAIL (London)
 September 26, 2011 Monday
 BABIES WHO ARE ALREADY OBESE INSIDE THE WOMB  BYLINE: BY JENNY HOPE MEDICAL CORRESPONDENT  LENGTH: 531 words
CHILDHOOD obesity starts in the womb, with overweight mothers giving birth to fat babies.
New scanning techniques have allowed British scientists to examine fat levels in newborn babies.
They found some had built up fat around their abdomen in the same way as adults in their 50s.
It is the first direct link to be shown between the weight of a mother-to-be and her child.
Obese youngsters are more likely to develop a string of health problems, including heart disease, brittle bones, diabetes and asthma.
Almost half of women of child-bearing age are overweight or obese and more than 15 per cent of pregnant women are obese.
This also raises their odds of dying in pregnancy, of their baby being stillborn and a host of pregnancy complications, some of which can be fatal.
The study was led by Professor Neena Modi, the UK's top authority on high-risk health problems in newborns.
She said magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans had provided clear evidence that being overweight or obese in pregnancy could result in potentially harmful changes to a baby's fat levels while still in the womb. 
Her team, which studied 54 boys and 51 girls at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, found a total of 31 babies had more adipose, or fat, tissue around their abdomen than would have been expected.
This increased proportionately with the obesity of the mother.
Professor Modi, professor of neonatal medicine at Imperial College London, said: 'The biological changes identified in the study were increased total fat, particularly around the tummy.
'I was very surprised to be able to detect such a clear continuum of effect of maternal BMI (body mass index) on the baby.
'This is a very important finding indeed, opening the door to a new understanding of how a mother's metabolism affects her baby.
'This shows how sensitive the baby is to the environment experienced within the womb and how lifelong effects may be initiated before birth.'
In adults, adipose tissue is found mainly under the skin, but also in deposits between the muscles, around the intestines and around the heart Ð collecting fats which come from food eaten or produced in the body.
Newborn babies typically have about 700g of adipose tissue, but for each unit increase in maternal BMI, this increased by approximately 7g with a huge build-up in fat in the babies' livers.
'Normally, a newborn baby has minimal or no detectable liver fat,' said Professor Modi.
'But for each unit increase in maternal BMI, the baby's liver fat content increased by 8 per cent.'
The findings come as experts predict obesity will cost the NHS up to £6.3billion a year by 2015 unless more is done to tackle the spiralling problem.
Professor Modi said it was important that all women hoping to have families were aware that being obese could affect their unborn children's health prospects.
'Adipose tissue not only stores energy and provides insulation, but is also a source of variety of hormones. 
Being too fat is unhealthy and increases the risk of many diseases.
'In adults too much adipose tissue around the tummy is particularly bad and is associated with much greater risk of developing heart disease, high blood pressure and diabetes.'
j.hope@dailymail.co.uk











Date Published: 26/09/2011
Title: 36
Body: 422
Sentences: 17
telegraph.co.uk
 September 26, 2011 Monday 8:04 AM GMT 
 Overweight mothers 'give birth to fat babies', study finds;  Childhood obesity appears to begin in a mother's womb, a new study has concluded using state of the art technology to monitor fat levels in unborn babies.  LENGTH: 404 words
Researchers found some babies have similar build up of fat around their abdomen that adults aged in their 50s have. 
The study of babies at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, west London, used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans to investigate links between obesity in children and their mothers. 
It reportedly found evidence that being overweight or obese in pregnancy could result in potentially harmful changes to a baby's fat levels while still in the womb. 
The study, led by Prof Neena Modi, one of Britain's best experts on high-risk health problems in newborns found nearly a third of children had more fat than expected. 
Of the 105 babies - 54 boys and 51 girls - a total of 31 babies had more adipose, or fat, tissue around their abdomen than normal. 
Experts said the study was the first direct link that proved the weight of a mother-to-be was passed on to her child and showed that overweight mothers gave birth to fat babies. 
"I was very surprised to be able to detect such a clear continuum of effect of maternal BMI (body mass index) on the baby," said Prof Modi, head of neonatal medicine at Imperial College London. 
"This is a very important finding indeed, opening the door to a new understanding of how a mother's metabolism affects her baby." 
Newborn babies usually have about 700g of adipose tissue, but for each unit increase in maternal BMI, this increased by approximately 7g with a huge build-up in fat in the babies' livers. 
Meanwhile in adults, adipose tissue is found mainly under the skin, but also in deposits between the muscles, around the intestines and around the heart. 
Prof Modi, who is also a consultant neonatologist at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, told the Daily Mail that all women should be aware of the effects of being obese and what this means for their child. 
"This shows how sensitive the baby is to the environment experienced within the womb and how lifelong effects may be initiated before birth," she said. 
Body mass index is calculated by dividing a person's weight in kilograms by the square of their height in metres. 
The World Health Organisation classes a BMI between 18.5 and 25 as normal weight, between 25 and 30 as overweight and over 30 as obese. 
In adults, high amounts of fat around the stomach and in the liver impair their control of blood sugar, leading to diabetes.
Problems associated with obesity are set to cost the NHS up to £6.3 billion a year by 2015. 


