 Metro (UK)
 September 12, 2011 Monday  Edition 1;  National Edition
 Found: Genes that can give you a stroke  BYLINE: Hayden Smith  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 30  LENGTH: 208 words
NEW ways of tackling high blood pressure could emerge after a major study identified more than 20 genetic factors that influence the risk.
A previously unknown link between hypertension and an iron-overload condition called haemochromotosis was also found in the study, part funded by the British Heart Foundation.
Millions of Britons have high blood pressure, a major risk factor for heart disease and strokes.
Researchers pooled results from more than 200,000 people around the world to identify 28 genetic variants which can affect blood pressure.
'The more of these variants an individual has, the greater are his or her chances of having hypertension, left ventricular wall thickness, stroke and coronary artery disease,' said co-author Prof Aravinda Chakravarti.
Related research by the same team found six other genetic links to maximum and minimum blood pressure.
 The foundation's medical director, Prof Peter Weissbeg, said it was crucial to understand the causes of hypertension.
'But your genes are only one piece of the puzzle,' he added.
'You are less likely to have high blood pressure if you stick to a healthy diet, do plenty of exercise and maintain a healthy weight.'
 The researchers' findings are published in the journal Nature Genetics.



 The Daily Telegraph (London)
 September 12, 2011 Monday  Edition 1;  Scotland
 Study pinpoints high blood pressure genes;  News Bulletin  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2  LENGTH: 121 words
A major international study has found more than 20 genetic variants that influence the risk of high blood pressure.
Scientists say that the discoveries could lead to new ways of tackling high blood pressure, heart disease and stroke.
In total 28 variants were identified by pooling results from genetic studies involving more than 200,000 people around the world.
The study - which was reported in an early online edition of Nature - was part-funded by the British Heart Foundation, but Prof Peter Weissberg, the charity's medical director, warned: "Your genes are only one piece of the puzzle.
"You are less likely to have high blood pressure if you stick to a healthy diet, do plenty of exercise, and maintain a healthy weight.''


