Date Published: 17/05/2011
Word count Title: 3
Word count Body: 74
Sentence count: 5

The Sun (England)
 May 17, 2011 Tuesday  Edition 1;  Ireland
 Depression gene find  BYLINE: FIONA WYNNE  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20  LENGTH: 80 words
By FIONA WYNNE 
SCIENTISTS are homing in on a specific GENE which may be responsible for depression.
Researchers found "solid evidence" that genetic variations on a particular chromosome could cause the illness. 
English boffin Dr Gerome Breen said: "A region called chromosome 3p25-26 is strongly linked to the disorder. 
These findings are truly exciting as, possibly for the first time, we have found a genetic locus for depression."
It is hoped the discovery will help in treatments.










Date Published: 16/05/2011
Word count Title: 7
Word count Body: 167
Sentence count: 9

The Daily Telegraph (London)
 May 16, 2011 Monday  Edition 3;  National Edition
 Genetic link to depression promises future treatments  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8  LENGTH: 177 words
A gene which is thought to be responsible for depression has been tracked down by scientists.
Researchers at King's College London have found "solid evidence" that genetic variations on a particular chromosome could cause the disorder.
It is hoped that the discovery will help in the development of future treatments.
Scientists analysed 839 families suffering from severe and recurrent depression.
Dr Gerome Breen, lead author, said: "In a large number of families where two or more members have depression we found robust evidence that a region called chromosome 3p25-26 is strongly linked to the disorder.
"These findings are truly exciting as possibly, for the first time, we have found a genetic locus for depression. 
This breakthrough in understanding the risk for depression may get us closer to developing more effective therapies, though patients should not expect to see these available for 10 to15 years." 
The findings were independently replicated by a group at Washington University and both papers are being published in the American Journal of Psychiatry.







Date Published: 16/05/2011
Word count Title: 10
Word count Body: 259
Sentence count: 13
DAILY MAIL (London)
 May 16, 2011 Monday
 FOUND, ROGUE GENE THAT COULD MAKE YOU PRONE TO DEPRESSION  BYLINE: BY SOPHIE BORLAND HEALTH REPORTER  LENGTH: 265 words
DEPRESSION could be caused by a single rogue gene, a groundbreaking study claims.
Scientists have discovered flaws in people's DNA which may make them more likely to suffer from the condition.
Their findings could lead to the development of better treatments for the disorder, which is notoriously difficult to manage.
Researchers from King's College London working with an American team at Washington University Medical School in St Louis, have pinpointed a section of DNA they believe is responsible for depression.
This region Ð known as chromosome 3p25-26 Ð contains up to 40 genes, and one or more probably causes the condition.
British researchers first suggested genes could cause depression in 2003, but have so far been unable to pinpoint which genes are responsible.
They now plan to carry out more detailed work this year to identify the genes.
Up to one in five Britons will suffer from depression at some point during their lives. 
Although it is often triggered by traumatic events Ð such as grief, redundancy or divorce Ð scientists have long known certain people are more susceptible.
The scientists examined the DNA of more than 900 families with two or more siblings with depression.
Their findings, in the American Journal of Psychiatry, show that the depressed siblings had the same genetic variations in the same section of their DNA, suggesting depression is inherited from parents.
Author Gerome Breen, of the Institute of Psychiatry at King's College, said the findings will not result in a test for depression but understanding the risk will lead to more effective therapies.



Date Published: 16/05/2011
Word count Title: 5
Word count Body: 144
Sentence count: 8
The Express
 May 16, 2011 Monday  U.K. 1st Edition
 Feeling low? It's a gene  SECTION: NEWS; 30  LENGTH: 146 words
SCIENTISTS are homing in on a gene which may be responsible for depression.
Researchers at King's College, London, have found "robust evidence" genetic variations in a chromosome could cause the disorder.
They analysed 839 families in which two or more members suffered.
Lead author Dr Gerome Breen said for the first time researchers had found where the disorder might be caused although any one of 40 genes could be involved.
He said: "A region called chromosome 3p25-26 is strongly linked? this may get us closer to more effective therapies though patients should not expect these for 10 to 15 years."
The findings, replicated at Washington University, appear in the American Journal of Psychiatry.
Depression affects about one person in five.
Marjorie Wallace of the mental health charity Sane said: "It is very exciting that there seems to be progress finding the g ene involved."










Date Published: 16/05/2011
Word count Title: 10
Word count Body: 211
Sentence count: 10
The Independent
Independent.co.uk
 May 16, 2011 Monday 12:00 AM GMT 
 Hope for depression sufferers as study links illness to genes  BYLINE: By Jeremy Laurance, Health Editor  SECTION: HEALTH NEWS  LENGTH: 211 words
Scientists have for the first time established a genetic cause for depression narrowing it down to a specific chromosone. 
The discovery was made by an international team of researchers led by King's College London who studied 800 families where two or more members had severe depression. 
They found clear evidence that chromosome 3p25-26 was strongly linked to the disorder. 
The paper is published in The American Journal of Psychiatry. 
"This is a first step but it's a big step," said Professor Lefkos Middleton, one of the researchers. 
The next step will be to find the gene or genes responsible, understand their role and function and whether drugs can be used to correct it, he said.
Gerome Breen, lead author of the study and lecturer at King's College, London, the Institute of Psychiatry, said: "These findings are truly exciting as for the first time we have found a genetic locus for depression."
It was likely that the chromosomal region identified contributed only "a couple of per cent" to the risk of developing depression.
But the discovery was significant because it was likely to lead to further genetic regions which could unlock the secrets of depression, which is forecast to become the disorder with the highest disease burden in the world by 2020. 





Date Published: 16/05/2011
Word count Title: 6
Word count Body: 126
Sentence count: 7
The Mirror
 May 16, 2011 Monday  3 Star Edition
 'PROOF' GENE COULD CAUSE DEPRESSION;  HEALTH  BYLINE: MIKE SWAIN  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16  LENGTH: 130 words
SEVERE depression may be due to a specific gene.
Researchers found "solid evidence" that a particular chromosome could cause the disorder.
It is now hoped the discovery will improve future treatments.
Lead author Dr Gerome Breen, at the Institute of Psychiatry at King's College London, said: "In many families we found robust evidence that depression is linked to a region called chromosome 3p25-26.
"This is truly exciting as we have found a genetic locus for the disease."
The work, studying 839 families with a history of the illness, was independently replicated at Washington University and both studies are being published in the American Journal of Psychiatry.
Mental health charity Sane said: "It is very exciting but we are still some distance from identifying the 'culprit' gene."


REUTERS Scientists find genetic link to depression

By Kate Kelland (Editing by Alison Williams)

LONDON | Mon May 16, 2011 9:42am BST 
Scientists say they have discovered the first solid evidence that variations in some peoples' genes may cause depression -- one of the world's most common and costly mental illnesses.
And in a rare occurrence in genetic research, a British-led international team's finding of a DNA region linked to depression has been replicated by another team from the United States who were studying an entirely separate group of people.
"What's remarkable is that both groups found exactly the same region in two separate studies," Pamela Madden, who led the U.S. team at Washington University, said in a statement.
The researchers said they hoped the findings would bring scientists closer to developing more effective treatments for patients with depression, since currently available medicines for depression only work in around half of patients.
"These findings ... will help us track down specific genes that are altered in people with this disease," said Gerome Breen of King's College London's Institute of Psychiatry, who led the other research group.
The researchers said they believed many genes were involved in depression.
These findings are unlikely to benefit patients immediately, with any new drugs developed from them likely to take another 10 to 15 years.
However, they will help scientists understand what may be happening at the genetic and molecular levels in people with depression.
The first study analysed more 800 families with recurrent depression, while the second examined depression and heavy smoking in a series of families from Australia and Finland.
Both studies were published in the American Journal of Psychiatry on Monday and both teams reported a strong link between depression and genetic variations in a region called chromosome 3p25-26.
"Normally in genetic studies of depression, replication of findings is very difficult and frequently takes years to emerge, if ever," said Breen, who gave a briefing in London about the work.
Major depression affects about 20 percent of people at some point in their lives. Severe and recurring depression affects up to 4 percent of people and is notoriously hard to treat.
The World Health Organisation has forecast that depression will rival heart disease as the health disorder with the highest disease burden in the world by 2020.
According to a 2006 study, depression is responsible for 100 million lost working days a year in England and Wales alone at a cost of 9 billion pounds.
Studies of families with depression have indicated that the disorder has a genetic link and scientists think around 40 percent of the risk of developing it is contributed by genes, with the rest down to environmental and other external factors.
"We are just beginning to make our way through the maze of influences on depression and this is an important step towards understanding what may be happening at the genetic and molecular levels," Michele Pergadia, who worked on Washington University study, said in a statement about the findings.
Breen's team is now conducting detailed gene sequencing studies in 40 of the families involved in the first study to try to find specific genes and variations that show a link.

