Metro
By Tariq Tahir - 22nd August, 2011
Words – 175
Sentences - 6
Commuting is more stressful for women than men 
The stress of daily commuting damages the mental health of women, a new study shows.
 And it may come as no surprise that the worst affected are mothers with pre-school youngsters. 
They are four times more likely to suffer mental problems than men with children of a similar age.
The study, published in the Journal Of Health Economics, involved asking people whether they had lost sleep over worry, felt under strain or had a sense of self-worthlessness.
Economics professor Jennifer Roberts of Sheffield University said: ‘Women,  especially those with children, are more likely to add errands to their commute such as food shopping and dropping off and picking up children from childcare.’
Only women who were single and childless, who had flexible work hours or whose partners were main carers for their children were unaffected.
Paul Dolan, of the London School of Economics, said: ‘Men also experience competing demands on their time, so it may simply be they are less affected by the psychological costs of commuting.’
  

The Express
Words – 145
Sentences –9 
Date- 23rd august 2011
By Daily Express Reporter

WOMEN HIT WORST BY DAILY COMMUTE 


WOMEN suffer more stress from their daily commute than men even though they tend to spend less time travelling.

A report has found that childcare and housework means women are more sensitive to time spent commuting.

They also try to pack in other chores at the same time – such as ferrying children and shopping for food.

Researchers at the London School of Economics and Sheffield University found commuting has a negative effect on women’s mental health while men are, generally, unaffected.

Their research, in the Journal of Health Economics, says women have a greater esponsibility for day-to-day tasks. 

Professor Jennifer Roberts said: “Women, especially those with children, are more likely to add errands to their commute. 

“These make commuting stressful.”

The only men to be affected had pre-school children and even then the effect was less than for women in a relationship but without children


