DAILY MAIL (London)
 February 23, 2011 Wednesday
 USING MOBILE PHONES 'DOES NOT INCREASE CANCER RISK'  BYLINE: BY JENNY HOPE MEDICAL CORRESPONDENT  LENGTH: 305 words
USING a mobile phone does not increase your risk of getting brain cancer, official statistics suggest.
There has been virtually no change in rates of the disease despite the fact the number of mobile phones in the UK has risen to about 70million, experts found.
Researchers at the University of Manchester sought to shed light on the ongoing controversy over the possible effects of radio wave exposure from Britain's ever-increasing use of mobile phones.
They looked at data on rates of newly diagnosed brain cancers in England between 1998 and 2007.
The Office for National Statistics revealed no significant change in the incidence of brain cancers during the nine-year period.
Revealing the findings in the journal Bioelectromagnetics, lead researcher Dr Frank de Vocht, an expert in occupational and environmental health, said it was 'unlikely we are at the forefront of a cancer epidemic' related to mobile phone use.
While the team cannot exclude the possibility that some people are more susceptible, Dr de Vocht concluded: 'A causal link between mobile phone use and cancer is unlikely because there is no evidence of any significant increase in the disease since their introduction and rapid proliferation.'
There is no 'plausible biological mechanism' for radio waves to directly damage genes, resulting in cells becoming cancerous, he said.
The team, which included experts at the Institute of Occupational Medicine in Edinburgh and Drexel University, Philadelphia, did find a very small rise in the number of cancers in the temporal lobe Ð of 31 extra cases per year in a population of 52million. 
Cases of other brain cancers in men actually fell slightly.
Their report concluded: 'We interpret our data as not indicating a pressing need to implement public health measures to reduce radio-frequency exposure from mobile phones.'

The Express
 February 18, 2011 Friday  U.K. 1st Edition
 Mobile phones given a clean bill of health  BYLINE: By Victoria Fletcher  SECTION: NEWS; 04  LENGTH: 513 words
MOBILE phones do not cause brain tumours and will not trigger a cancer epidemic, according to a new study into their longterm use.
The research will provide relief to the 48 million Britons who regularly use mobile phones despite fears over their safety.
The nine-year study provides strong new evidence that the cancer fears were misplaced.
It concludes that there has been no significant increase in the rate of brain cancer in England since 1998.
Britain has the highest number of mobile phone users per head of population in the world.
Take-up in the UK is 89 per cent, with England at 90, Scotland 85, and Wales 89 per cent. In 1996 only around 17 per cent of households owned a mobile phone.
In the latest study, scientists from Manchester University reviewed brain cancer rates across England and compared them with mobile phone use.
Although there has been a slight increase in one type of brain cancer, there has been a decrease in another form.
The slight increase in cancer of the brain's temporal lobe was so small that it cannot be put down to mobile phone use, the scientists say.
And they believe there is no need for people to be told to cut down on their use.
The study, published in the journal of Bioelectromagnetics, concludes: "The increased use of mobile phones between 1985 and 2003 has not led to a noticeable change in the incidence of brain cancer in England between 1998 and 2007."
Fears over the safety of mobile phones began more than a decade ago as their popularity soared.
Back then, there was very little data on whether they might cause ill health.
Some animal studies suggested they might alter brain behaviour and even heat the skull, while others said they were safe.
But many people remained concerned about holding a device that conducts radio waves so near to the head.
For this reason, health officials urged people to be cautious and to limit their use.
Some people even started to use hands-free sets.
But in the past two years, most studies have given phones a clean bill of health.
Dr Frank de Vocht, who led the research published yesterday, said: "It is very unlikely that we are at the forefront of a brain cancer epidemic related to mobile phones, as some have suggested.
"We cannot exclude the possibility that there are people who are susceptible to radio frequency exposure or that some rare brain cancers are associated with it, but we interpret our data as not indicating a pressing need to implement public health measures to reduce radio frequency exposure from mobile phones."
Professor Malcolm Sperrin, director of medical physics at Royal Berkshire Hospital, said the study was good news.
"It adds to the bulk of evidence to suggest there is no substantial link between mobile phones and brain cancer."
John Cooke, of the Mobile Operators Association, said: "Its findings on cancer rates are consistent with similar studies in the Nordic countries and the US.
"It adds further weight to the view of the World Health Organisation, which stated in June 2010, 'To date, no adverse health effects have been established for mobile phone use'."


