
Results
1.
BREASTFED BABIES 'ARE NOT PROTECTED AGAINST ECZEMA'  DAILY MAIL (London), August 24, 2011 Wednesday, 407 words, BY JENNY HOPE MEDICAL CORRESPONDENT



Return to List

1 of 1 DOCUMENT


DAILY MAIL (London)

August 24, 2011 Wednesday

BREASTFED BABIES 'ARE NOT PROTECTED AGAINST ECZEMA'

BYLINE: BY JENNY HOPE MEDICAL CORRESPONDENT

LENGTH: 407 words

BREASTFEEDING may not protect children against developing eczema, a study suggests.
Scientists found babies who were exclusively breastfed for four months or longer were just as likely to develop eczema as those weaned earlier. 
The UK is among European countries that recommends prolonged breastfeeding as a means of reducing the risk of childhood eczema.
Although the researchers are not disputing the other health benefits breastmilk offers, they say that there is only a 'small protective effect' against severe eczema among babies breastfed for less than four months in developed countries.
The experts, based at King's College London, The University of Nottingham and the University of Ulm, in Germany, looked at data from 51,119 children aged eight to 12, in 21 countries across Europe, Latin America, Africa and Asia.
The study formed phase two of The International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood, the largest research project of its type ever undertaken, in which information on eczema, breastfeeding and time of weaning was gathered by parental questionnaire.
Children also underwent a skin examination for eczema and skin prick testing to environmental allergens, including house dust mites, says the report published online in the British Journal of Dermatology.
The researchers found no evidence for a protective effect of breastfeeding and delayed weaning on eczema risk in both developed and developing countries.
Dr Carsten Flohr, one of the researchers based at King's College London, said: 'UK breastfeeding guidelines with regard to eczema should be reviewed.
'Further studies are required to explore how and when solids should be introduced alongside breastfeeding to aid protection against eczema and other allergic diseases.'
Dr Flohr added that the other benefits of breastfeeding on infant health, unrelated to eczema, remain important.
The Department of Health recommends exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life with additional breastfeeding while the baby moves on to solids.
Nina Goad, of the British Association of Dermatologists, said: 'The size of this study means that its findings are very significant, although the authors recognise that further studies are needed.
'Following these further studies we may need to review the UK's advice on how long mothers should breastfeed exclusively for, and at what age we should be weaning our infants, in relation to eczema prevention.' j.hope@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2011

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Papers


Copyright 2011 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
All Rights Reserved


