20 September 2011 Last updated at 11:51 
BBC
Belfast scientists 'develop prostate cancer treatment'
Scientists at Queen's University say they have developed a new combination treatment for prostate cancer.
It will now be tested in a second phase after proving successful in the initial stage of trials.
The treatment is the first of its kind to be developed and is aimed at men with an advanced and aggressive form of prostate cancer which has spread to the bone. 
This is responsible for around 10,000 deaths each year in the UK. 
The new treatment combines traditional chemotherapy treatments with two doses of a radioactive chemical.
Dr Joe O'Sullivan, consultant and senior lecturer in clinical oncology, said a new treatment was needed as traditional chemotherapy was not always effective.
"This is a significant development in the fight against prostate cancer," he said.
"While this combination treatment still has to go to phase two of trials, to know that this combination is safe and feasible as a treatment is a huge step forward."
This second trial phase will involve up to 100 patients from Northern Ireland and the Netherlands.
The results are expected within two years.

Metro (UK)
 September 19, 2011 Monday  Edition 1;  Ireland
 Prostate cancer breakthrough;  homedigest  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4  LENGTH: 96 words
A new treatment for prostate cancer has been pioneered by scientists at Queen's university Belfast.
It is aimed at men with an advanced and aggressive form of prostate cancer which has spread to the bone and is the first of its kind.
It combines traditional chemotherapy treatments with two doses of a radioactive chemical which can target areas of the bone affected by the cancer.
Dr Joe O'Sullivan, senior lecturer in clinical oncology at the centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology at Queen's, said: 'This is a significant development in the fight against prostate cancer.'


 The Mirror
 September 19, 2011 Monday  Eire Edition
 TREATMENT BOOST FOR PROSTATE CANCER SUFFERERS;  HOPE IN DISEASE BATTLE  BYLINE: ALANA FEARON  SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16  LENGTH: 289 words
SCIENTISTS have developed a revolutionary new treatment for deadly prostate cancer.
It could be a lifeline for the more than 500 men here who die from the silent killer every year.
Ireland has the highest rate of the disease in Europe.
The treatment is aimed at men with an advanced and aggressive form of the cancer which has spread to the bone.
It combines traditional c he m o -therapy with two doses of a different chemical.
And experts are hailing it as a massive step forward in the battle against the disease.
Project leader Dr Joe O'Sullivan said: "While this combination treatment still has to go to phase two of trials, to know that this combination is safe and feasible as a treatment is a huge step forward.
"This is a significant development in the fight against prostate cancer."
While it kills hundreds in Ireland every year the disease is 90% curable if it's caught early.
Chemotherapy is the most common treatment but the benefits are usually short-lived.
And now pioneering scientists are hoping that combining two different types of drugs may boost survival rates.
Dr O'Sullivan added: "Traditional chemotherapy treatments aren't always effective in treating aggressive and advanced forms of prostate cancer so we in needed to develop a new treatment which will provide better outcomes for patients with this type of cancer.
"The combination of chemotherapy with the radioactive chemical Rhenium-186 HEDP has the potential to improve outcomes, including survival, for men with this form of cancer."
The second phase of the trial has already started in Holland and will begin in the UK in the next six months.
It will involve up to 100 patients from the North and the Netherlands and the results should be known within two years.

