DAILY MAIL
How central heating is making you fat: Sitting in your cosy home stops you from burning calories

Word Count = 383 (round to 380)
Sentence Count = 17 (including title)

By Daily Mail Reporter UPDATED: 11:28, 26 January 2011 

It already adds unwanted pounds to your winter fuel bills.
And having the heating on high could also pile extra pounds on your weight, scientists believe.
Experts say many of us now keep our homes so cosy that we no longer have to burn as many calories to naturally warm up our bodies.
Modern centrally heated homes with efficient double glazing are helping to send obesity rates soaring, a study claims.
Scientists from University College London say it is an increasing problem across the developed world where average indoor temperatures are constantly rising.

And its impact on weight is made worse by the extra time we now spend indoors, whether working from home or shopping online.
Even when we do venture out, it is often via heated cars or other transport to offices and workplaces where the temperature is carefully controlled by air conditioning units.
The research, in the journal Obesity Reviews, said there was a direct link between ‘reduced exposure to seasonal cold and increases in obesity in the UK and U.S.’.
If the body is already warm it does not need to convert a ‘brown’ fat known as adipose tissue into energy to generate heat, the study said. 
Brown fat was previously thought to be present only in infants, playing a vital role in keeping them warm, but recent research found it also in adults.
This latest study suggested that prolonged exposure to comfortable warm temperatures may permanently reduce the body’s ability to burn this brown fat.
Lead author Fiona Johnson said: ‘Increased time spent indoors, widespread access to central heating and air conditioning, and increased expectations of thermal comfort all contribute to restricting the range of temperatures we experience in daily life.
‘This reduces the time our bodies spend under mild thermal stress – meaning we’re burning less energy.
‘This could have an impact on energy balance and ultimately have an impact on body weight and obesity.’
She called for health strategies to look at heating just as they currently look at other environmental factors such as diet and exercise.
Study co-author Marcella Ucci said: ‘The findings suggest that lower winter temperatures in buildings might contribute to tackling obesity as well as reducing carbon emissions.’


METRO
Central heating could be making you fat according to scientists

Word Count = 250 (round to 250)
Sentence Count = 12 (including title)

Having your central heating on can lead to a lack of physical activity, which can lead to obesity, according to scientists. 

Central heating could be making you fat, apparently 
As well as centrally heated homes, we've apparently been spoiled by double glazed windows and insulation which help to keep to the heat in our homes.
University College London scientists say that the average temperature of a home is rising proportionately with obesity levels across the developed world.
The researchers also suggested that when we do leave the house, we are still being treated to warm temperatures in modes of transport, places of work and public buildings such as shopping centres. 
Lead author of the research, Fiona Johnson said: ‘Increased time spent indoors, widespread access to central heating and air conditioning, and increased expectations of thermal comfort all contribute to restricting the range of temperatures we experience in daily life. 
‘This reduces the time our bodies spend under mild thermal stress – meaning we’re burning less energy. 
‘This could have an impact on energy balance and ultimately have an impact on body weight and obesity.’
The findings, claim the researchers, point towards a change in the way we see heating, as lower temperatures could help to facilitate weight loss. 
Co-author Marcella Ucci added: ‘The findings suggest that lower winter temperatures in buildings might contribute to tackling obesity as well as reducing carbon emissions.’
The research appears in the journal Obesity Reviews. 


TELEGRAPH
Losing weight could be as easy as turning down the thermostat

Word Count = 507 (round to 510)
Sentence Count = 20 (including title)

By Richard Alleyne, Science Correspondent
6:00AM GMT 26 Jan 2011
If you want to lose weight then you should open a window or turn down the thermostat, claims a study. 
For modern living with the central heating turned up and efficient double glazing preventing cold draughts are helping to send obesity rates soaring, a new study claims. 
Britons are getting so used to being warm and cosy in their homes that their bodies no longer have to use up as much energy to ward off the cold leading to weight gain. 
It is a growing problem across the developed world where average indoor temperatures are constantly rising, said the study by scientists from London university UCL. 
The added time spent indoors, whether working from home or shopping online instead of going out, is only adding to the obesity problem. 
Even if they do go out it is often into heated cars or other transport to offices and workplaces where the temperature is carefully governed by air conditioning units. 
The research, published in the journal Obesity Reviews, said there was a direct link between "reduced exposure to seasonal cold and increases in obesity in the UK and US". 
If the body is warm it does not need to produce its own energy to do so and may also lose some of its ability to produce heat as a result, said the study. 
When the body is cold it produces brown fat known as adipose tissue which burns energy to create heat, it said. 
But homes in developed countries have been getting gradually warmer over the years through more efficient heating or people expecting a greater level of comfort in their living rooms and so turning the thermostat up. 
And spending greater periods of time in these warmer environments could see the body losing its ability to create brown adipose tissue, said UCL lead author Dr Fiona Johnson. 
She said: "Increased time spent indoors, widespread access to central heating and air conditioning, and increased expectations of thermal comfort all contribute to restricting the range of temperatures we experience in daily life. 
"This reduces the time our bodies spend under mild thermal stress – meaning we're burning less energy. 
"This could have an impact on energy balance and ultimately have an impact on body weight and obesity." 
She called for health strategies should look at heating just as they currently look at other environmental factors such as diet and exercise. 
The co-author, Marcella Ucci, added: "The findings suggest that lower winter temperatures in buildings might contribute to tackling obesity as well reducing carbon emissions." 
The research found that average living room temperatures have inched up around half a degree centigrade (one degree Fahrenheit) every decade and now average more than 20C (68F). 
The body starts to heat itself if it drops below the "thermoneutral zone" which is around 25C (77F). 
A four centigrade rise in temperature reduces the amount of energy used to heat the body by as much as 800 calories. 


