21875885,Chocolate consumption and cardiometabolic disorders: systematic review and meta-analysis.,"*Cacao
Cardiovascular Diseases/*epidemiology
Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/*epidemiology
*Eating
Humans
Metabolic Syndrome X/*epidemiology
Risk Factors",Buitrago-Lopez A and Sanderson J and Johnson L and Warnakula S and Wood A and Di Angelantonio E and Franco OH,"OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association of chocolate consumption with the risk of developing cardiometabolic disorders. DESIGN: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials and observational studies. DATA SOURCES: Medline, Embase, Cochrane Library, PubMed, CINAHL, IPA, Web of Science, Scopus, Pascal, reference lists of relevant studies to October 2010, and email contact with authors. STUDY SELECTION: Randomised trials and cohort, case-control, and cross sectional studies carried out in human adults, in which the association between chocolate consumption and the risk of outcomes related to cardiometabolic disorders were reported. DATA EXTRACTION: Data were extracted by two independent investigators, and a consensus was reached with the involvement of a third. The primary outcome was cardiometabolic disorders, including cardiovascular disease (coronary heart disease and stroke), diabetes, and metabolic syndrome. A meta-analysis assessed the risk of developing cardiometabolic disorders by comparing the highest and lowest level of chocolate consumption. RESULTS: From 4576 references seven studies met the inclusion criteria (including 114,009 participants). None of the studies was a randomised trial, six were cohort studies, and one a cross sectional study. Large variation was observed between these seven studies for measurement of chocolate consumption, methods, and outcomes evaluated. Five of the seven studies reported a beneficial association between higher levels of chocolate consumption and the risk of cardiometabolic disorders. The highest levels of chocolate consumption were associated with a 37% reduction in cardiovascular disease (relative risk 0.63 (95% confidence interval 0.44 to 0.90)) and a 29% reduction in stroke compared with the lowest levels. CONCLUSIONS: Based on observational evidence, levels of chocolate consumption seem to be associated with a substantial reduction in the risk of cardiometabolic disorders. Further experimental studies are required to confirm a potentially beneficial effect of chocolate consumption.",Missing,BMJ (Clinical research ed.),343
